# Control Scope and Privacy with Modules
Covers modules and paths, the `use`, `pub`, and  `as` keywords.
## Modules Cheat Sheet
- **Start from the crate root**: compiler checks `src/lib.rs` or `src/main.rs` first
- **Declaring Modules**: In the crate root file, you declare new modules (e.x. `mod garden;`) and the compiler will look for the module's code in these places:
    - Inline within curly brackets that replace the semicolon following `mod garden`
    - In the file `src/garden.rs`
    - In the file `src/garden/mod.rs`
- **Declaring Submodules**: In any file other than the crate root, you can declare submodules. (e.x. `mod vegetables;` in `src/garden.rs`) The compiler will look for the submodule's code within the directory named for the parent module in these places:
    - Inline, directly following `mod vegetables`, within curly brackets instead of semicolon
    - In the file `src/garden/vegetables.rs`
    - In the file `src/garden/vegetables/mod.rs`
- **Paths to code in modules**: Once a module is part of the crate, you can refer to code in that module from anywhere else in the same crate, privacy rules permitting, using the path to the code. For example, `Asparagus` type in the garden vegetables module, would be found at: `crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus`.
- **Private vs. public**: Code within a module is private from its parent modules by default. To make a module public, declare with `pub mod` instead of `mod`. To make items within a public module public aswell, use `pub` before their declarations.
- **The `use` keyword**: Within a scope, the `use` keyword creates shortcuts to items to reduce repetitions of long paths (Think like python's `import _ as _`). In any scope that can refer to `crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus`, you can create a shortcut with `use crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus;`, and now you only need to write `Asparagus` to use that type in this scope.

Example binary crate `backyard`:
```
backyard
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
└── src
    ├── garden
    │   └── vegetables.rs
    ├── garden.rs
    └── main.rs
```
The crate root is `src/main.rs`, which contains:
```rs
use crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus;

pub mod garden;

fn main() {
    let plant = Asparagus {};
    println!("I'm growing {plant:?}!");
}
```
The `pub mod garden;` tells the compiler to include the code it finds in `src/garden.rs`, which is:
```rs
pub mod vegetables;
```
And since `pub mod vegetables;` means the code in `src/garden/vegetables.rs` is included too, which is:
```rs
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Asparagus {}
```
## Grouping Related Code in Modules
Modules let us organize code within a crate for readability, easy use, and privacy, since code within a module is private by default.

For example, lets look at this library create with the functionality of a restaurant.

Front of house and back of house analogy, create new library named `restaurant` by running `cargo new restaurant --lib`, then put the following code in `src/lib.rs`:
```rs
mod front_of_house {
    mod hosting {
        fn add_to_waitlist() {}

        fn seat_at_table() {}
    }

    mod serving {
        fn take_order() {}

        fn serve_order() {}

        fn take_payment() {}
    }
}
```
The module is defined with the `mod` keyword followed by the name of the module. You can nest modules as shown.

The term "crate root" is used since the contents of the files `src/lib and src/main` creates a module named `crate` at the root of the crate's module structure, as shown below:
```
crate
 └── front_of_house
     ├── hosting
     │   ├── add_to_waitlist
     │   └── seat_at_table
     └── serving
         ├── take_order
         ├── serve_order
         └── take_payment
```
Note the nesting.
