# Recoverable Errors with `Result`
Most errors aren't serious enough to warrant termination or panic. This is best handled using `Result`.
The `Result` enum has 2 variants `Ok` and `Err`:
```rs
enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E),
}
```
`T` and `E` are generic type parameters. `T` represents the type of the value returned in a success case inside of the `Ok` variant, and `E` represents the type of the error that will be returned in a failure case inside of the `Err` variant.

Here's an example of a function that returns `Result` because it could fail:
```rs
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file_result = File::open("hello.txt");
}
```
The return type of `File::open` is a `Result<T, E>`. The generic `T` success value has been filled with `std::fs::File`, which is the file handle. The generic `E` error value has been filled with `std::io::Error`.

This is a simple example of how to handle the `Result`:
```rs
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file_result = File::open("hello.txt");

    let greeting_file = match greeting_file_result {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(error) => panic!("Problem opening the file: {error:?}"),
    };
}
```
Just like with `Option`, `Result` brings its variants into scope. When the result is `Ok`, this code returns the inner `file` out of the `Ok`, and then the file handle is assigned to the variable `greeting_file`. When the result is `Err`, this match calls the `panic!` macro.

## Matching on Different Errors
The previous code would panic no matter why `File::open` failed, but if we want to take different actions for different failure reasons, we could do the following:
```rs
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::ErrorKind;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file_result = File::open("hello.txt");

    let greeting_file = match greeting_file_result {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(error) => match error.kind() {
            ErrorKind::NotFound => match File::create("hello.txt") {
                Ok(fc) => fc,
                Err(e) => panic!("Problem creating the file: {e:?}"),
            },
            _ => {
                panic!("Problem opening the file: {error:?}");
            }
        },
    };
}
```
The type of error returned is `io::Error`, a struct provided by the standard library. It contains a method `kind`, which can be called get an `io::ErrorKind` value.

We want to check/match whether the value returned by `error.kind()` is the `NotFound` of `ErrorKind`. If it is, we try to create the file, but since this could also fail, we use the second arm, in the inner match, to print a different error message when the file can't be created.
### Alternatives to using `match` with `Result<T, E>`
While these methods work, they use a lot of `match`, which is a primitive. A better method can be using closures, for example, `unwrap_or_else`, as shown below:
```rs
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::ErrorKind;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file = File::open("hello.txt").unwrap_or_else(|error| {
        if error.kind() == ErrorKind::NotFound {
            File::create("hello.txt").unwrap_or_else(|error| {
                panic!("Problem creating the file: {error:?}");
            })
        } else {
            panic!("Problem opening the file: {error:?}");
        }
    });
}
```
This has the same behavior as before, but doesn't contain `match` and is cleaner to read.
### Shortcuts for Panic on Error
`match` works but can be overly verbose. `unwrap` is a shortcut method implemented like the previous `match` setup. If the `Result` is `Ok`, `unwrap` will return the value inside of `Ok`. If the `Result` is `Err`, `unwrap` will call the `panic!` macro. Here's an example:
```rs
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file = File::open("hello.txt").unwrap();
}
```
Running this code without the expected file:
```
thread 'main' panicked at src/main.rs:4:49:
called `Result::unwrap()` on an `Err` value: Os { code: 2, kind: NotFound, message: "No such file or directory" }
```
Similarly, expect can be used in the same way, but can also supply the error message:
```rs
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file = File::open("hello.txt")
        .expect("hello.txt should be included in this project");
}
```

## Propagating Errors
When a function fails, rather than handling the error within the function itself, it can be returned to the calling code and decide what to do. For example:
```rs
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::{self, Read};

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let username_file_result = File::open("hello.txt");

    let mut username_file = match username_file_result {
        Ok(file) => file,
        Err(e) => return Err(e),
    };

    let mut username = String::new();

    match username_file.read_to_string(&mut username) {
        Ok(_) => Ok(username),
        Err(e) => Err(e),
    }
}
```
This function can be much more concise, but this is the manual method.
If the function succeeds, `Ok` with `String` (`username`) that was read from the file. If there are any issues, the code receives `Err` with `io::Error` that contains more info about the problem(s).

Note the use of the `return` keyword in the first `match`. This returns out of the function early and passes the error value from `File::open`, back to the calling code as the error value. This works in this case because both conditions in this case can throw an `io::Error`.

The calling code will handle either an `Ok` value with a username, or an `Err` value with an `io::Error`. All the handling is up to the calling code, it could `panic!`, use a default username, etc. This concept is so common, the `?` operator is used to make it easier.
### The `?` Operator Shortcut
The following example shows an implementation of `read_username_from_file` that has the same functionality as before but much more concise, through the use of `?`.
```rs
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::{self, Read};

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let mut username_file = File::open("hello.txt")?;
    let mut username = String::new();
    username_file.read_to_string(&mut username)?;
    Ok(username)
}
```
Placing `?` after a `Result` value handles almost the same way as the `match` expressions used previously. If the value is an `Ok`, the value inside it gets returned, and the program continues. If the value is an `Err`, the `Err` is returned rom the whole function as if the return keyword was used.

The primary difference is that the values returned by `?` go through the `from` function, converting the error values from the original type into the error type defined in the return type of the current function.

For example, you could change the `read_username_from_file` function to return a custom error type `OurError`. If you define `impl From<io::Error> for OurError`, then `?` calls in the body of the function will call `from` and convert the types automatically.

Additionally, the `?` operator lets you chain method calls immediately as shown:
```rs
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::{self, Read};

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    let mut username = String::new();

    File::open("hello.txt")?.read_to_string(&mut username)?;

    Ok(username)
}
```
Rather than creating a variable `username_file`, the call to `read_to_string` is chained directly onto the result of `File::open("hello.txt")?`. There's still `?` at the ends of each call, allowing error propagation and the same value handling as before.

You can make this even shorter by using the function `fs::read_to_string` as shown below:
```rs
use std::fs;
use std::io;

fn read_username_from_file() -> Result<String, io::Error> {
    fs::read_to_string("hello.txt")
}
```
Reading a file into a string is fairly common so this function is provided in the standard library for convenience.
### Where to Use the `?` Operator
The `?` operator can only be used in functions whose return type is compatible with the value the `?` is used on. This is because the `?` operator is designed to perform an early return, like how the `match` with `return` did previously.

This example below fails:
```rs
use std::fs::File;

fn main() {
    let greeting_file = File::open("hello.txt")?;
}
```
This example fails because the `main` function returns `()`, not `Result`.

To fix the error, you can either change the return type of `main` to match the function with `?`, or use `match` or one of the `Result<T, E>` methods to handle it.

`?` can also be used with `Option<T>` values. This behaves similarly to `Result`, if the value is `None`, the `None` is returned early, and if the value is `Some`, the value inside the `Some` is the resultant value of the expression, and the function continues. Here's an example of this where the function finds the last character of the first line of text:
```rs
fn last_char_of_first_line(text: &str) -> Option<char> {
    text.lines().next()?.chars().last()
}
```
This function returns `Option<char>` because it's possible that there is a character, but also possible that there isn't. This code takes the `text` string slice and calls the `lines` method on it, which returns an iterator over the lines in the string. To examine the first line, `next` is called on the iterator, and if the `text` is empty, the call returns `None`, which `?` stops and returns `None`. If `text` is not the empty string, `next` returns `Some` containing a string slice of the first line in `text`.

The `?` extracts the string slice, and we call `chars` on the string slice to get an iterator of its characters. We then call `last` to return the last item in the iterator. This is also an `Option` because it's possible that the first line has an empty string, but other lines have text.

Note that while you can use the `?` operator on a function that returns `Result`, and on a function that returns `Option`, but you cannot mix and match. The `?` operator won't automatically convert a `Result` to an `Option` or vice versa. In these cases, you'll need to use the `ok` method on `Result` or `ok_or` on `Option`, to explicitly convert.

`main` can also return a `Result<(), E>`. This example below shows the previous program with a return type of `main` to be `Result<(), Box<dyn Error>>`, and we had to add an `Ok(())` to the end of the program.
```rs
use std::error::Error;
use std::fs::File;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn Error>> {
    let greeting_file = File::open("hello.txt")?;

    Ok(())
}
```
The `Box<dyn Error>` type is a trait object, which will be explained more later. For now, `Box<dyn Error>` represents "any kind of error". Using `?` on a `Result` value in a `main` function with the error type `Box<dyn Error>` is allowed because it allows any `Err` value to be returned early. Even though the body of this `main` will only ever return errors of type `std::io::Error`, by specifying `Box<dyn Error>`, this signature will continue to be correct even if more error types are returned.

When a `main` function returns a `Result<(), E>` the executable exits with a value of `0` if `main` returns `Ok(())` and with exit with a nonzero value if `main` returns an `Err` value. This is mainly for compatibility with the C exit code convention.

The `main` function may return any types that implement `std::process::Termination`, which contains a function `report` that returns an `ExitCode`.
