# To `panic!` or Not to `panic!` 
You could call panic for any error situation, regardless of if there is a way to recover or not, but then you're making that decision on behalf of the calling code. When you return a `Result`, you give the calling code options. In general, returning `Result` is a good default choice when you're defining a function that might fail.

In certain situations, like prototype code and tests, it's more appropriate to write code that panics rather than return a `Result`. There are also certain situations to look out for where the compiler can't tell that failure is impossible, but a human can.

## Examples, Prototype Code, and Tests
When writing an example to illustrate some concept, including robust error handling can make the example less clear. In these cases, it's understood that a call to `unwrap` that could panic is a placeholder for proper error handling.

Similarly, `unwrap` and `expect` are very handy while prototyping and haven't decided how to handle errors yet. They leave clear markers for when you're ready to make the program more robust.

In tests, if a method call fail you want the whole test to fail, even if that method isn't the functionality being tested. Since `panic!` is how tests are marked as failures, a panic in any called code ensures the test fails.

## When You Have More Information Than the Compiler
It's also appropriate to call `expect` when you have some other logic that ensures the `Result` will have an `Ok` value, but the logic isn't something the compiler understands. You still have a `Result` value that needs handling, but its logically impossible that it would fail in your particular situation. For example,
```rs
    use std::net::IpAddr;

    let home: IpAddr = "127.0.0.1"
        .parse()
        .expect("Hardcoded IP address should be valid");
```
We're creating an `IpAddr` instance by parsing a hardcoded string. We know that `127.0.0.1` is a valid IP address, so using `expect` is acceptable. However, using a hardcoded value doesn't change the return type of the `parse` method, it is still `Result`, and the compiler makes us consider the `Err` possibility.

## Guidelines for Error Handling
It's advisable to have your code panic when it's possible that your code could end up in a bad state. In this context, a bad state is when some assumption, guarantee, contract, or invariant has been broken, such as when invalid, contradictory, or missing values are passed to your code PLUS:
- The bad state is something that is unexpected, as opposed to something that will likely happen, like invalid user input
- Your code after this point needs to rely on not being in this bad state, as opposed to checking at every step (i.e. passing a single `Result` and then extracting the value, vs propagating many `Result` values)
- There's not a good way to encode this information in the types used. This will be explained later in ch 18.

If someone calls your code and passes in nonsense values, it's best to return an error so that the user of the library can decide what to do. However, in cases where continuing could be insecure/harmful, the best choice may be to call `panic!` and alert the person to the bug in their code (via `rustc`) so they can fix it during development. `panic!` can also be appropriate if you're calling external code that is out of your control and returns an invalid state you are unable to fix.

If failure is expected, it's more appropriate to return a `Result` than to make a `panic!` call. Examples of this include a parser given malformed data or an HTTP request returning a status that indicates you have hit a rate limit. Returning a `Result` indicates that failure is an expected possibility the calling code must decide how to handle.

When your code performs an operation that could put a user at risk if it's called using invalid values, your code should verify/validate the values first, and panic in the case that they aren't valid. This is primarily for safety reasons, as attempting to operate on invalid data could expose vulnerabilities. Functions often have contracts: a functions behavior is only guaranteed if the inputs meet certain requirements. Panicking when a contract is violated makes sense because a contract violation always indicates a caller-side bug, not the error you want the calling code to handle. A function's contracts, especially when a violation will cause a panic, should be explained in the API documentation for the function.

Having many error checks in every function would be verbose and annoying. Thankfully, you can use Rust's type system (and type checking) to do much of the work for you. If your function has a particular type as a parameter, you can proceed with the code's logic knowing that the compiler has already ensured you have a valid value. For example, if you have a type rather than an `Option`, your program expects something rather than nothing. Your code then doesn't have to handle two cases for `Some` and `None`, only one case for having the correct type. Code trying to pass `None` won't even compile, so you don't need another runtime check. An example of this is using an unsigned integer type like `u32` which ensures that the parameter is never negative.

## Custom Types for Validation
Let's use Rust's type system to ensure we have a valid value one step further and look at creating a custom type for validation. With the guessing game from chapter 2, we did not validate the user's guess, to see if it was between the valid range. The consequences in this case were not dire, as "Too high" or "Too low" they are still correct.

We can improve this system by parsing the guess as an `i32` instead of a `u32` to allow potentially negative numbers, and add a check for the number being in range:
```rs
    loop {
        // --snip--

        let guess: i32 = match guess.trim().parse() {
            Ok(num) => num,
            Err(_) => continue,
        };

        if guess < 1 || guess > 100 {
            println!("The secret number will be between 1 and 100.");
            continue;
        }

        match guess.cmp(&secret_number) {
            // --snip--
    }
```
The `if` expression checks whether our value is out of range, tells the user about the problem, and calls `continue` to start the next iteration and ask for another guess. After this `if`, we can proceed and compare `guess` and the secret knowing that `guess` is between 1 and 100.

This is not an ideal solution, if it were critical that the program only operated on values between 1 and 100, and many functions had this requirement, having a check in every function would be tedious and potentially impact performance.

Instead, we can make a new type in a dedicated module and put the validations in a function to create an instance of the type, rather than repeating many validations. This way, functions can use the new type and confidently use the values they receive. Here's an example:
```rs
pub struct Guess {
    value: i32,
}

impl Guess {
    pub fn new(value: i32) -> Guess {
        if value < 1 || value > 100 {
            panic!("Guess value must be between 1 and 100, got {value}.");
        }

        Guess { value }
    }

    pub fn value(&self) -> i32 {
        self.value
    }
}
```
Note that this code depends on a module delcaration `mod guessing_game;`, with this new file, a struct `Guess` that has a field named `value` holding an `i32`. 

Then, we implement a function named `new` on `Guess` that creates instances of `Guess` values. The `new` function has one parameter, `value`, of type `i32` and returns a `Guess`. The `new` function tests `value` to ensure it's between 1 and 100. If `value` fails this test, it calls `panic!`.

Next, we implement a public method named `value` that borrows `self`, and returns `i32`. This is a getter (`Guess` struct is private). It's important that the `value` field is private so that code using the `Guess` struct is not allowed to set `value` directly. Code outside of the `guessing_game` module MUST use `Guess::new` to create an instance of `Guess`.

Now, a function that requires only numbers between 1 and 100 could then declare in its signature that it takes or returns a `Guess` rather than `i32`, without needing any additional checks.

# Summary
Rust error handling and type checking is goated. The `panic!` macro signals that your program is in a state it can't handle and tells the process to stop. The `Result` enum uses the type system to indicate that operations may fail in a recoverable way.
