# Generic Types, Traits, and Lifetimes
Rust's tool for handling duplication of concepts is generics: abstract stand-ins for concrete types or other properties.

Rather than a concrete type like `i32` or `String`, functions can take parameters of a generic type. We've used generics previously with `Option<T>`, `Vec<T>`, `HashMap<K, V>`, and `Result<T, E>`.

First, we'll extract a function to reduce code duplication, and then use the sme technique to make a generic function two functions that differ only by the types of their parameters. We'll also cover generic types for structs and enums.

Then, we'll use traits to define generic behavior. You can combine traits and generic types to constrain a generic type to accept only those types that have a particular behavior, as opposed to any type.

Finally, lifetimes are a variety of generics that give the compiler information about how references relate to each other. Lifetimes give the compiler enough information about borrowed values to ensure that references will be valid in more situations.

## Removing Duplication by Extracting a Function
Generics allow us to replace specific types with a placeholder that represents multiple types to remove duplication. Let's look at how to remove duplication in a way that DOESN'T involve generic types by extracting a function that replaces specific values with a placeholder that represents multiple values. Then, we'll do the same with a generic function.

For example, this program:
```rs
fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let mut largest = &number_list[0];

    for number in &number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");
}
```
We store a list of integers in the variable `number_list` and place a reference to the first number in the list in `largest`. We then iterate through all the numbers and if the number is greater, store the reference in `largest`.

We now have to do the same, but for two different lists, one method of accomplishing this would be to duplicate the code:
```rs
fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let mut largest = &number_list[0];

    for number in &number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");

    let number_list = vec![102, 34, 6000, 89, 54, 2, 43, 8];

    let mut largest = &number_list[0];

    for number in &number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {largest}");
}
```
While this does work, duplicating can be tedious and error-prone. Instead, we can create an abstraction by defining a function that operates on any list of integers passed in as a parameter:
```rs
fn largest(list: &[i32]) -> &i32 {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let number_list = vec![102, 34, 6000, 89, 54, 2, 43, 8];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");
}
```
The `largest` function has a parameter `list`, which represents any slice of `i32` values we might pass into the function. 

Next, we'll use these same steps with generics to further reduce code duplication, and allow more flexibility in our functions!
