# Generic Data Types
We use generics for things like function signatures or structs, which we can then use with many different concrete data types.

## In Function Definitions
When defining a function that uses generics, we place generics in the signature of the function where we would normally specify the data types of the parameters and return value.

With this `largest` function example from the previous section:
```rs
fn largest_i32(list: &[i32]) -> &i32 {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn largest_char(list: &[char]) -> &char {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest_i32(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let char_list = vec!['y', 'm', 'a', 'q'];

    let result = largest_char(&char_list);
    println!("The largest char is {result}");
}
```
The `largest_i32` function finds the largest `i32` in a slice. The `largest_char` function finds the largest `char` in a slice. These function bodies have the same code, so let's introduce a generic type parameter.

To parameterize the types in a new single function, we need to name the type parameter in the same fashion we do for the value parameters in a function. You can use any identifier as a type parameter name, but by convention we use `T`.

When we use a parameter in the body of the function, we have to declare the parameter name in the signature so the compiler knows what it means. When we use a type paramater name in a function signature, we have to declare the type parameter before we use it, using `<>`:
```rs
fn largest<T>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
```
This is read as "The function `largest` is generic over some type `T`" This function has one parameter named `list`, a slice of values of type `T`. The `largest` function returns a reference to a value of type `T`.

This example shows the combined `largest` function using the generic type, as well as example calls using `i32` or `char`:
```rs
fn largest<T>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
    let mut largest = &list[0];

    for item in list {
        if item > largest {
            largest = item;
        }
    }

    largest
}

fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let result = largest(&number_list);
    println!("The largest number is {result}");

    let char_list = vec!['y', 'm', 'a', 'q'];

    let result = largest(&char_list);
    println!("The largest char is {result}");
}
```
However, this does not compile, and errors over line 5:
```
error[E0369]: binary operation `>` cannot be applied to type `&T`
 --> src/main.rs:5:17
  |
5 |         if item > largest {
  |            ---- ^ ------- &T
  |            |
  |            &T
```
This error states that the body of `largest` won't work for all the possible types `T` could represent. Since we wanted to compare values of type `T`, we can only use types whose values can be ordered. To enable comparisons, stdlib has the `std::cmp::PartialOrd` trait that can be implemented on types. To fix this, we can restrict the types valid for `T` to only those that implement `PartialOrd`.
```rs
fn largest<T: std::cmp::PartialOrd>(list: &[T]) -> &T {
```
This will then compile as stdlib implements `PartialOrd` on both `i32` and `char`.

## In Struct Definitions
We can also define structs to use a generic type parameter in one or more fields using `<>`. This example shows a `Point<T>` struct with both `x` and `y` of any type.
```rs
struct Point<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

fn main() {
    let integer = Point { x: 5, y: 10 };
    let float = Point { x: 1.0, y: 4.0 };
}
```
Note that this requires these points to be of the SAME type. Mixed types won't compile:
```rs
struct Point<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

fn main() {
    let wont_work = Point { x: 5, y: 4.0 };
}
```
To define generics of different types, use multiple generic type parameters:
```rs
struct Point<T, U> {
    x: T,
    y: U,
}

fn main() {
    let both_integer = Point { x: 5, y: 10 };
    let both_float = Point { x: 1.0, y: 4.0 };
    let integer_and_float = Point { x: 5, y: 4.0 };
}
```
Now all of these `Point` instances are valid. Avoid using too many generic type parameters, it can be hard to read, and may indicate that the code needs restructured.

## In Enum Definitions
Like structs, we can define enums to hold generic data types in their variants. Lets examine `Option<T>`:
```rs
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None,
}
```
The `Option<T>` enum is generic over type `T`, with 2 variants: `Some`, holding one value of type `T`, and `None`, with no value.

Enums can also use multiple generic types. `Result` is another example:
```rs
enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E),
}
```
The `Result` enum is generic over two types `T` and `E`, with two variants: `Ok`, which holds a value of type `T` and `Err`, which holds a value of type `E`. This makes it convenient to use the `Result` enum anywhere we have an operation that *might* succeed, or fail.

## In Method Definitions
We can also implement methods on structs and enums using generic types. This example shows the previous `Point<T>` struct with a method `x` implemented on it.
```rs
struct Point<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

impl<T> Point<T> {
    fn x(&self) -> &T {
        &self.x
    }
}

fn main() {
    let p = Point { x: 5, y: 10 };

    println!("p.x = {}", p.x());
}
```
This method `x`, returns a reference to the data in field `x`.

Note that we have to declare `T` just after `impl` so it can be used to specify implementing methods on type `Point<T>`. By declaring the type after `impl`, Rust can tell that the type in angle brackets in `Point` is a generic type rather than a concrete type. You can choose to use a different name for the generic parameter in the `impl` and the generic parameter in the `struct`, but convention is to use the same name. If you write a method within an `impl` that declares a generic type, that method is defined on ANY instance of the type, regardless of the concrete type submitted.

We can also specify constraints on generic types when defining methods. We could implement methods only on a type like `Point<f32>` rather than `Point<T>`:
```rs
impl Point<f32> {
    fn distance_from_origin(&self) -> f32 {
        (self.x.powi(2) + self.y.powi(2)).sqrt()
    }
}
```
This means that the type `Point<f32>` will have a `distance_from_origin` method, but other instances of `Point<T>` where `T` is not `f32` will not have this method.

Generic type parameters in a struct definition aren't always the same as ones used in the same struct's method signatures. This example uses the generics `X1` and `Y1` for the `Point` struct and `X2` and `Y2` for the `mixup` method to make the example clearer. It creates a new `Point` with the `x` value from the `self` `Point` (of type `x1`) and the `y` value from the passed-in `Point` (of type `Y2`)
```rs
struct Point<X1, Y1> {
    x: X1,
    y: Y1,
}

impl<X1, Y1> Point<X1, Y1> {
    fn mixup<X2, Y2>(self, other: Point<X2, Y2>) -> Point<X1, Y2> {
        Point {
            x: self.x,
            y: other.y,
        }
    }
}

fn main() {
    let p1 = Point { x: 5, y: 10.4 };
    let p2 = Point { x: "Hello", y: 'c' };

    let p3 = p1.mixup(p2);

    println!("p3.x = {}, p3.y = {}", p3.x, p3.y);
}
```
In `main`, we defined a `Point` that has an `i32` for `x` (with value `5`) and an `f64` for `y` (with value `10.4`). The `p2` variable is a `Point` struct with a string slice for `x` (with value `"Hello"`) and a `char` for `y` (with value `'c'`). Calling `mixup` on `p1` with the argument `p2` gives us `p3`, which will have an `i32` for `x` because `x` came from `p1`. The `p3` variable will have a `char` for `y` because `y` came from `p2`. The `println!` macro prints: `p3.x = 5, p3.y = c`.

The purpose of this is to demonstrate a situation where some generic parameters are declared with `impl` and some are declared with the method definition. The generic parameters `X1` and `Y1` are declared after `impl` because they go with the struct definition. The generic parameters `X2` and `Y2` are declared after `fn mixup` because they are only relevant to the method.

## Performance of Code Using Generics
No runtime performance cost! Monomorphization of the code using generics at compile time. (it fills in the used concrete types)

Example:
```rs
let integer = Some(5);
let float = Some(5.0);
```
When compiled, the compiler reads the values used for `Option<T>` and identities the two types used: `i32` and `f64`.

The monomorphized version of the code looks similar to the following:
```rs
enum Option_i32 {
    Some(i32),
    None,
}

enum Option_f64 {
    Some(f64),
    None,
}

fn main() {
    let integer = Option_i32::Some(5);
    let float = Option_f64::Some(5.0);
}
```
The generic `Option<T>` is replaced with the specific definitions created by the compiler. Because the generic code is compiled into specific code, no extra runtime cost is added.
