# Defining Shared Behavior with Traits
A trait defines the functionality a particular type has and can share with other types. We use traits to define shared behavior in an abstract way. We can use trait bounds to specify that a generic type can be any type that has certain behavior.

> Traits are similar to interfaces in languages like java, though with some differences

## Defining a Trait
A type's behavior consists of the methods we call on that type. Different types can share the same behavior if we can call the same methods on all those types. Trait definitions group method signatures together to define a set of behaviors necessary to accomplish a purpose.

For example, let's say there are multiple structs that hold various amounts of text: A `NewsArticle` struct that holds a news story in a particular location and a `SocialPost` that can have, at most, 280 characters along with metadata that indicates if it was a new post, repost, or reply.

We want to make a media aggregator library crate named `aggregator` that displays summaries of data that might be stored in `NewsArticle` or `SocialPost`. To do this, we need a summary from each type, which we will request by calling a `summarize` method on an instance. This example shows a public `Summary` trait to accomplish this:
```rs
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String;
}
```
This declares a `trait` `Summary`. The `pub` keyword makes this public and allows crates depending on this crate to make use of the trait too. Inside the curly brackets, the method signatures that describe the behaviors of the types that implement the trait, in this case `summarize`.

After the method signature, rather than providing an implementation in curly brackets, we use a semicolon. Each type that implements this trait must provide its own custom behavior for the body of the method. The compiler enforces that any type that has the `Summary` trait, will have the method `summarize` defined with a matching signature.

A trait can have multiple methods in its body, one per line, with semicolons.

## Implementing a Trait on a Type
Now that we've defined the signatures of the `Summary` trait's methods, we can implement it on the types of our media aggregator. This example shows an implementation of the `Summary` trait on the `NewsArticle` struct that uses the headline, author, and location to create the return value of `summarize`. For the `SocialPost` struct, we define `summarize` as the username and the entire text of the post, assuming a max content length of 280 chars.
```rs
pub struct NewsArticle {
    pub headline: String,
    pub location: String,
    pub author: String,
    pub content: String,
}

impl Summary for NewsArticle {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("{}, by {} ({})", self.headline, self.author, self.location)
    }
}

pub struct SocialPost {
    pub username: String,
    pub content: String,
    pub reply: bool,
    pub repost: bool,
}

impl Summary for SocialPost {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("{}: {}", self.username, self.content)
    }
}
```
Implementing on traits is similar to implementing on normal methods. The difference is that after `impl`, we put the trait name, `for`, and the name of the type. Within the `impl` block, we put the method signatures that the trait defined. Here we fill the body of each method with the desired specific behavior.

Now that we have implemented the `Summary` trait on `NewsArticle` and `SocialPost`, users of the crate can call the trait methods on instances of `NewsArticle` and `SocialPost` just like normal methods. The only difference is that the trait must be brought into scope as well as the types (`use`). Here's an example:
```rs
use aggregator::{SocialPost, Summary};

fn main() {
    let post = SocialPost {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from(
            "of course, as you probably already know, people",
        ),
        reply: false,
        repost: false,
    };

    println!("1 new post: {}", post.summarize());
}
```
This prints: `1 new post: horse_ebooks: of course, as you probably already know, people`.

Other crates that may depend on `aggregator` can also  bring `Summary` into scope to implement `Summary` on their own types. One restriction is that you can only implement a trait on a type if either the trait, type, or both are local to the crate. For example, we can implement standard library traits `Display` on a custom type like `SocialPost` as a part of the `aggregator` crate because the type `SocialPost` is local to `aggregator`. We can also implement summary on `Vec<T>` within `aggregator` because `Display` and `Vec<T>` are both defined in the standard library, and aren't local to `aggregator`. 

Alternatively, we can't implement external traits on external types. For example, we can't implement `Display` on `Vec<T>` within `aggregator` because `Display` and `Vec<T>` are both defined in the standard library, and aren't local to `aggregator`. This prevents two crates from implementing the same trait for the same type.

## Using Default Implementations
It can be useful to have default behavior for some or all of the methods in a trait, rather than having to implement all methods on every type. In this example we specify a default string for `summarize` of the `Summary` trait rather than only defining the signature:
```rs
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        String::from("(Read more...)")
    }
}
```
To use this default implementation to summarize `NewsArticle`, specify an empty `impl` with `impl Summary for NewsArticle {}`.

Even though we're not directly defining `summarize` on `NewsArticle`, we provided a default implementation and specified it implements the `Summary` trait. As a result we can do the following:
```rs
    let article = NewsArticle {
        headline: String::from("Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!"),
        location: String::from("Pittsburgh, PA, USA"),
        author: String::from("Iceburgh"),
        content: String::from(
            "The Pittsburgh Penguins once again are the best \
             hockey team in the NHL.",
        ),
    };

    println!("New article available! {}", article.summarize());
```
This prints: `New article available! (Read more...)`.

Creating this default implementation doesn't require us to change anything from our previous example if we wanted to override the default.

Default implementations can call other methods in the same trait, even if the other methods don't have defaults. For example, we could define `Summary` to have `summarize_author` whose implementation is required, but define `summarize` that has a default implementation and calls `summarize_author`:
```rs
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarize_author(&self) -> String;

    fn summarize(&self) -> String {
        format!("(Read more from {}...)", self.summarize_author())
    }
}
```
To use this, we only need to define `summarize_author`:
```rs
impl Summary for SocialPost {
    fn summarize_author(&self) -> String {
        format!("@{}", self.username)
    }
}
```
After this is defined, we can call `summarize` on instances of `SocialPost`, and the default implementation of `summarize` calls the provided `summarize_author`:
```rs
    let post = SocialPost {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from(
            "of course, as you probably already know, people",
        ),
        reply: false,
        repost: false,
    };

    println!("1 new post: {}", post.summarize());
```
This prints: `1 new post: (Read more from @horse_ebooks...)`

Note that it's not possible to call the default implementation from an overriding implementation of the same method.

## Using Traits as Parameters
You can use traits to define functions that accept many types. We'll use the `Summary` trait implemented on `NewsArticle` and `SocialPost` to define a `notify` function that calls `summarize` on it's `item` parameter, which is of some type that implements `Summary`. We use `impl Trait` as shown:
```rs
pub fn notify(item: &impl Summary) {
    println!("Breaking news! {}", item.summarize());
}
```
Instead of a concrete type for `item`, we specify `impl` and the trait name. This parameter accepts any type that implements the specified trait. In the `notify` body, we can call any methods on `item` that come from the `Summary` trait, like `summarize`. We can call `notify` and pass in `NewsArticle` or `SocialPost`. Code that calls the function with any other type (like `i32`) won't compile, because they don't implement summary.

### Trait Bound Syntax
The `impl Trait` syntax works for simple cases, but it is a shorthand for the longform trait bound: 
```rs
pub fn notify<T: Summary>(item: &T) {
    println!("Breaking news! {}", item.summarize());
}
```
This code is equivalent to the previous section, but more verbose. We place trait bounds with the declaration of the generic type parameter after a colon inside angle brackets.

The `impl Trait` syntax is convenient and concise, while the fuller trait bound can express more complexity. For example, we can have 2 parameters that implement `Summary`. Doing with `impl Trait` looks like:
```rs
pub fn notify(item1: &impl Summary, item2: &impl Summary) {
```
Using `impl Trait` is appropriate if we want the function to allow `item1` and `item2` to have different types (as long as they both implement `Summary`). If we want to force both parameters to have the same type, we use a trait bound:
```rs
pub fn notify<T: Summary>(item1: &T, item2: &T) {
```
The generic type `T` specified as type of `item1` and `item2` parameters constrain the function such that the concrete types of `item1` and `item2` must match.
### Multiple Trait Bounds with the `+` Syntax
We can also specify more than one trait bound. Lets say we wanted `notify` to display formatting as well as `summarize` on `item`: We specify in `notify` that `item` must implement both `Display` and `Summary`. We do so using `+`:
```rs
pub fn notify(item: &(impl Summary + Display)) {
```
The `+` is also valid with trait bounds on generic types:
```rs
pub fn notify<T: Summary + Display>(item: &T) {
```
With the two trait bounds specified, `notify` can call `summarize` and use `{}` to format `item`.
### Clearer Trait Bounds with `where` Clauses
Using too many trait bounds has downsides. Each generic has its own bounds, so functions with multiple generic type parameters can contain lots of trait bound information between the function's name and parameter list, making the signature hard to read. To mitigate this, Rust has a `where` clause after the signature. So rather than:
```rs
fn some_function<T: Display + Clone, U: Clone + Debug>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32 {
```
You can use `where` and write:
```rs
fn some_function<T, U>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32
where
    T: Display + Clone,
    U: Clone + Debug,
{
```
This is a much less cluttered signature.

## Returning Types That Implement Traits
We can also use `impl Trait` in the return position to return a value of some type that implements a trait:
```rs
fn returns_summarizable() -> impl Summary {
    SocialPost {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from(
            "of course, as you probably already know, people",
        ),
        reply: false,
        repost: false,
    }
}
```
By using `impl Summary` for the return type, the `returns_summarizable` function returns some type that implements the `Summary` trait without naming a concrete type. In this example it returns `SocialPost`, but the calling code doesn't need to know that.

The ability to specify a return type by trait is useful with closures and iterators, which will be covered later. Closures and iterators create types that only the compiler knows or are lengthy. The `impl Trait` syntax allows you to specify that a function returns some type that implements `Iterator` without writing a long type.

However, you can only use `impl Trait` for returning a single type. The follow example doesn't work because it could return `NewsArticle` or `SocialPost` with `impl Summary`:
```rs
fn returns_summarizable(switch: bool) -> impl Summary {
    if switch {
        NewsArticle {
            headline: String::from(
                "Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!",
            ),
            location: String::from("Pittsburgh, PA, USA"),
            author: String::from("Iceburgh"),
            content: String::from(
                "The Pittsburgh Penguins once again are the best \
                 hockey team in the NHL.",
            ),
        }
    } else {
        SocialPost {
            username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
            content: String::from(
                "of course, as you probably already know, people",
            ),
            reply: false,
            repost: false,
        }
    }
}
```
There are restrictions to how `impl Trait` is implemented in the compiler. This behavior will be covered later.

## Using Trait Bounds to Conditionally Implement Methods
By using a trait bound with an `impl` block that uses generic type parameters, we can implement methods conditionally for types that implement the specified traits. For example `Pair<T>` always implements `new` to return an instance of `Pair<T>` (`Self` is a type alias for the type of the `impl` block). But in the next `impl` block, `Pair<T>` only implements `cmp_display` if its inner type `T` implements `PartialOrd` AND `Display`:
```rs
use std::fmt::Display;

struct Pair<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

impl<T> Pair<T> {
    fn new(x: T, y: T) -> Self {
        Self { x, y }
    }
}

impl<T: Display + PartialOrd> Pair<T> {
    fn cmp_display(&self) {
        if self.x >= self.y {
            println!("The largest member is x = {}", self.x);
        } else {
            println!("The largest member is y = {}", self.y);
        }
    }
}
```
We can conditionally implement a trait for any type that implements another trait. Implementations of a trait on any type that satisfies the trait bounds are called *blanket implementations* and are used extensively in the Rust stdlib. For example, `ToString` is implemented on any type that implements `Display`. It looks something like this:
```rs
impl<T: Display> ToString for T {
    // --snip--
}
```
Because of this blanket implementation, we can call the `to_string` method defined by the `ToString` trait on any type that implements the `Display` trait. For example, we can turn integers into their corresponding `String` values because integers implement `Display`
```rs
let s = 3.to_string();
```
Blanket implementations appear in the documentation for the trait in the “Implementors” section.

Traits and bounds let us write code that uses generic types to reduce duplication but also specify that we want the generic type to have particular behavior. The compiler can then use the trait bound information to check that all concrete types used provide the correct behavior. Overall, this allows for better runtime performance by moving these checks to compile-time, without giving up the flexibility of generics.
