# Validating References with Lifetimes
Lifetimes are another kind of generic we've been using. Rather than ensuring a type has the desired behavior, lifetimes ensure that references are valid as long as they are needed.

Every reference in rust (ch 4. "References and Borrowing") has a lifetime, which is the scope that the reference is valid. Most of the time, these lifetimes are implicit and inferred, similar to how types are mostly inferred. You are only required to annotate types when multiple are possible. Similarly, we must annotate lifetimes when lifetimes of references could have multiple relations. Rust requires that we annotate the relationships using generic lifetime parameters to ensure that the actual references used at runtime will be valid.

Annotating lifetimes is a concept mostly unique to Rust, so it will feel unfamiliar. This chapter discusses common ways they are handled.

## Dangling References
The main goal of lifetimes is to prevent dangling references, which, if they exist, would cause a program to reference data other than the data it's intended to reference. Consider the scoped program below:
```rs
fn main() {
    let r;

    {
        let x = 5;
        r = &x;
    }

    println!("r: {r}");
}
```
> Note that in these examples variables are declared without an initial value, so the name exists in the outer scope. This would violate the no null values rule, but if you try to use a variable without giving it a value, it will throw a compile-time error.

The outer scope defines a variable `r` with no initial value, and the inner scope declared a variable `x` with an initial value of 5. Inside the inner scope, we set the value of `r` as a reference to `x`. Then the inner scope ends and we print the value in `r`. This code fails to compile, because the value `r` refers to has gone out of scope before use. Here's the error:
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter10 v0.1.0 (file:///projects/chapter10)
error[E0597]: `x` does not live long enough
 --> src/main.rs:6:13
  |
5 |         let x = 5;
  |             - binding `x` declared here
6 |         r = &x;
  |             ^^ borrowed value does not live long enough
7 |     }
  |     - `x` dropped here while still borrowed
8 |
9 |     println!("r: {r}");
  |                   - borrow later used here

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0597`.
error: could not compile `chapter10` (bin "chapter10") due to 1 previous error
```
The error specifies that variable `x` "does not live long enough". The reason is that `x` is out of scope on line 7 where the inner scope ends, while `r` is still valid for the outer scope. This behavior is determined via the borrow checker.

## The Borrow Checker
The rust compiler has a borrow checker that compares scope to determine if all borrows are valid:
```rs
fn main() {
    let r;                // ---------+-- 'a
                          //          |
    {                     //          |
        let x = 5;        // -+-- 'b  |
        r = &x;           //  |       |
    }                     // -+       |
                          //          |
    println!("r: {r}");   //          |
}                         // ---------+
```
This is the same code as before but annotated to show the lifetime of `r` (with the scope `'a`) and the lifetime of `x` (with `'b`). The inner lifetime `'b` is much smaller than the outer `'a` lifetime block. At compile time, rust compares the size of the two and sees that `r` has a lifetime of `'a` but refers to memory with a lifetime of `'b`. The program is rejected because `'b` is shorter than `'a`. The subject of reference must live at least as long as the reference.

This example files the code by removing the dangling reference, and compiles without errors:
```rs
fn main() {
    let x = 5;            // ----------+-- 'b
                          //           |
    let r = &x;           // --+-- 'a  |
                          //   |       |
    println!("r: {r}");   //   |       |
                          // --+       |
}                         // ----------+
```
In this case, `x` has the lifetime `'b`, which is larger than `'a`. This means that `r` can reference `x` because rust knows the reference `r` will always be valid while `x` is valid.

Now that we've seen lifetimes of references and how Rust analyzes them, lets explore generic lifetimes in function parameters and return values.

## Generic Lifetimes in Functions
We'll write a function that returns the longer of two string slices. This function will take in two string slices and return a single string slice. After implementing the `longest` function, the code example should print `The longest string is abcd`:
```rs
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("abcd");
    let string2 = "xyz";

    let result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2);
    println!("The longest string is {result}");
}
```
Note that we want the function to take specifically string slices (references) rather than strings, because we don't want the `longest` function to take ownership of its parameters.

If we tried to implement the `longest` function as shown here, it won't compile:
```rs
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
    if x.len() > y.len() { x } else { y }
}
```
We get the following error about lifetimes:
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter10 v0.1.0 (file:///projects/chapter10)
error[E0106]: missing lifetime specifier
 --> src/main.rs:9:33
  |
9 | fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
  |               ----     ----     ^ expected named lifetime parameter
  |
  = help: this function's return type contains a borrowed value, but the signature does not say whether it is borrowed from `x` or `y`
help: consider introducing a named lifetime parameter
  |
9 | fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
  |           ++++     ++          ++          ++

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0106`.
error: could not compile `chapter10` (bin "chapter10") due to 1 previous error
```
This tells us that the return type needs a generic lifetime parameter on it because Rust can't tell whether the reference being returned refers to `x` or `y`. We don't know either in this case, because the `if` block could return a reference to either `x` or `y`!

When defining this function, we don't know the concrete values that will be passed into the function, so we don't know whether or not the `if` case or the `else` case will execute. We also don't know the concrete lifetimes of the references passed in, so we can't use scopes as we did previously. The borrow checker also can't determine this, because it doesn't know how the lifetimes of `x` and `y` relate to the lifetime of the return value. To fix this error, we add generic lifetime parameters that define the relationship between the references so the borrow checker and perform its analysis.

## Lifetime Annotation Syntax
Lifetime annotations don't change how long the references live. They describe the relationship of the lifetimes of multiple references to each other, without affecting the lifetimes. Just as functions can accept any type when the signature specifies a generic type parameter, functions can accept references with any lifetime by specifying a generic lifetime parameter.

Lifetime annotations have a slightly unusual syntax: The names of lifetime paramaters must start with an aposthrophe (`'`) and are usually all lowercase and very short, like generic types. Most people use `'a` for the first lifetime annotation. We place these annotations after the `&` of a reference, using a space to separate the annotation and the type.

Here's some examples, a reference to an `i32` without a lifetime parameter, a reference to an `i32` with a parameter `'a`, and a mutable reference to an `i32` that also has `'a`:
```rs
&i32        // a reference
&'a i32     // a reference with an explicit lifetime
&'a mut i32 // a mutable reference with an explicit lifetime
```
One lifetime annotation by itself doesn't have much meaning, because they are meant to tell Rust how generic lifetime parameters of multiple references relate. Let's examine how the lifetime annotations relate to each other in the context of the `longest` function.

## In Function Signatures
To use lifetime annotations in function signatures, we need to declare the generic lifetime parameters inside angle brackets between the function name and parameter list, just as we did with generic type parameters.

We want the signature to express the following constraint: The returned reference will be valid as long as both of the parameters are valid. This is the relationship between lifetimes of the parameters and the return value. If we name the lifetime `'a` and add it to each reference:
```rs
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
    if x.len() > y.len() { x } else { y }
}
```
The code will compile and produce the result we want when we use it with `main` as shown previously.

The function signature tells Rust that for some lifetime `'a`, the function takes two parameters, both of which are string slices that live AT LEAST as long as lifetime `'a`. The function signature also tells Rust that the string slice returned will also live AT LEAST as long as `'a`. In practice, this means that the lifetime of the reference returned by `longest` is the same as the smaller of the lifetimes of values referred to by the function arguments.

Remember, when we specify the lifetime parameters in this function signature, we're not changing the lifetimes of any values passed in/returned. We're specifying that the borrow checker should reject any values that don't adhere to these constraints. Note that the `longest` function doesn't need to know exactly how long `x` and `y` will live, just that some scope can be substitute for `'a` that satisfies the constraints.

When annotating lifetimes in functions, the annotations go in the function signature, not in the body. They become part of the contract/constraints of the function, much like types. Having the signatures contain the lifetime contract means the analysis performed by the compiler is much simpler. If there's a problem with how its annotated/called, the errors can point to the part of the code with the issue(s) much more precisely. On the other hand, if the compiler inferred the intended relationships, the compiler has a more difficult time pointing out the location of the issue.

When we pass concrete references to `longest`, the concrete lifetime substituted for `'a` is the part of the scope of `x` that overlaps with `y`. The generic lifetime `'a` will get the concrete lifetime that is equal to the smaller of the lifetimes of `x` and `y`. Because we've annotated the returned reference with `'a` aswell, the returned reference will also be valid for the length of the smaller of the lifetimes of `x` and `y`.

Lets lok at how the lifetime annotations restrict the `longest` function by passing in references that have different concrete lifetimes:
```rs
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("long string is long");

    {
        let string2 = String::from("xyz");
        let result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
        println!("The longest string is {result}");
    }
}
```
In this example, `string1` is valid until the end of the outer scope, `string2` is valid until the end of the inner scope. Running this code shows that the borrow checker approves; it compiles and prints `The longest string is long string is long`.

Now, lets try and example that shows the lifetime of the reference in `result` must be the smaller lifetime of the two arguments. The declaration of `result` gets moved outside the inner scope, but the assignment remains inside the scope, and the `println!` is moved after the inner scope ends:
```rs
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("long string is long");
    let result;
    {
        let string2 = String::from("xyz");
        result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
    }
    println!("The longest string is {result}");
}
```
When attempting to compile we get the following error:
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter10 v0.1.0 (file:///projects/chapter10)
error[E0597]: `string2` does not live long enough
 --> src/main.rs:6:44
  |
5 |         let string2 = String::from("xyz");
  |             ------- binding `string2` declared here
6 |         result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
  |                                            ^^^^^^^ borrowed value does not live long enough
7 |     }
  |     - `string2` dropped here while still borrowed
8 |     println!("The longest string is {result}");
  |                                      ------ borrow later used here

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0597`.
error: could not compile `chapter10` (bin "chapter10") due to 1 previous error
```
This error shows that for `result` to be valid for `println!`, `string2` would need to be valid until the end of the outer scope. Rust knows this since the lifetimes of the function parameters and return values use the same `'a`.

As humans, we can tell that `string1` is longer than `string2`, and that `result` will contain a reference to `string1`. We know that `string1` stays in scope, but since we told Rust that the lifetime of the reference returned by `longest` is the same as the smaller (`string2`), the borrow checker disallows this as it could have an invalid reference.

## Relationships
The way in which you specify lifetime parameters depends on what your function is doing. For example, if we changed the implementation of `longest` to  always return the first parameter rather than the longest string slice, we wouldn't need to specify a lifetime on `y`:
```rs
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &str) -> &'a str {
    x
}
```
We specified a lifetime parameter of `'a` for `x` and the return type, but not for `y`, since the lifetime of `y` doesn't have any relationship with the lifetime of `x` or the return value.

When returning a reference from a function, the lifetime parameter for the return type needs to match the lifetime parameter for one of the parameters. If the reference returned does not refer to one of the parameters, it must refer to a value created within the function. This would be a dangling reference because the value will go out of scope at the end of the function. For example:
```rs
fn longest<'a>(x: &str, y: &str) -> &'a str {
    let result = String::from("really long string");
    result.as_str()
}
```
Even though we've specified a lifetime parameter `'a` for the return type, it is not related to any of the parameters, so it will not compile:
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter10 v0.1.0 (file:///projects/chapter10)
error[E0515]: cannot return value referencing local variable `result`
  --> src/main.rs:11:5
   |
11 |     result.as_str()
   |     ------^^^^^^^^^
   |     |
   |     returns a value referencing data owned by the current function
   |     `result` is borrowed here

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0515`.
error: could not compile `chapter10` (bin "chapter10") due to 1 previous error
```
The problem is that `result` goes out of scope and gets cleaned up at the end of `longest`. We're trying to return a reference to `result` from the function. There's no way we could specify lifetime parameters that would change the dangling reference. The best fix in this case would be to return an owned data type rather than a reference, so that the calling function is responsible for cleaning up the value.

Ultimately, lifetime syntax is about connecting the lifetimes of various parameters and return values/functions. Once connected, Rust has enough information to allow memory-safe operations and disallow operations that would create dangling pointers or violate memory safety.

## In Struct Definitions
So far, the structs we've defined all hold owned types. We can define structs to hold references, but we would need to add a lifetime annotation on every reference in the struct's definition. This example has a struct that holds a string slice:
```rs
struct ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    part: &'a str,
}

fn main() {
    let novel = String::from("Call me Ishmael. Some years ago...");
    let first_sentence = novel.split('.').next().unwrap();
    let i = ImportantExcerpt {
        part: first_sentence,
    };
}
```
This struct has the single field `part` that holds a string slice, a reference. As with generics, we declare the name of the generic lifetime parameter inside angle brackets after the name of the struct, so it can be used in the body of the struct definition. This annotation means that an instance of `ImportantExcerpt` can't outlive the reference it holds in its `part` field.

The `main` function creates an instance of the `ImportantExcerpt` struct that holds a reference to the first sentence of the `String` owned by `novel`. The data in `novel` exists before the `ImportantExcerpt` instance is created. In addition, `novel` doesn't go out of scope until after `ImportantExcerpt` goes out of scope, so the reference is valid.

## Lifetime Elision
Every reference has a lifetime and you need to specify lifetime parameters for functions or structs that use references. However, this example compiles without lifetime annotations:
```rs
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str {
    let bytes = s.as_bytes();

    for (i, &item) in bytes.iter().enumerate() {
        if item == b' ' {
            return &s[0..i];
        }
    }

    &s[..]
}
```
The reason this function compiles without annotations is historical: In early versions (pre-1.0) of Rust, this code wouldn't compile, because every reference needed an explicit lifetime. The old signature would have looked like:
```rs
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```
This change was made because Rust programmers were entering the same lifetime annotations repeatedly. These were predictable and followed patterns, so the developers programmed these patterns into the compiler.

This is important as in the future, even more of these deterministic patterns could be added, requiring even fewer lifetime annotations!

The patterns programmed into Rust's analysis of references are called the lifetime elision rules. They are a set of particular cases the compiler will consider, and when your code fits these cases, you don't need to write the lifetimes explicitly.

The elision rules don't provide full inference. If there is still ambiguity about what lifetimes references have after Rust applies the rules, the compiler won't guess what the lifetime of the remaining references should be. Instead of guessing, the compiler will give an error that you can resolve by adding the annotations.

Lifetimes on input or method parameters are called *input lifetimes*, and lifetimes on return values are called *output lifetimes*.

The compiler uses three rules to determine the lifetimes of reference when there aren't explicit annotations. The first rule is for input lifetimes, the second and third is for return lifetimes. If the compiler reaches the end of these three rules and there are still references for which it can't figure out, the compiler will error. These apply to `fn` as well as `impl`.

The first rule is that the compiler assigns a lifetime parameter to reach parameter that's a reference. In other words, a function with one parameter gets one lifetime parameter: `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32)`; a function with two parameters gets two separate lifetime parameters: `fn foo<'a, 'b>(x: &'a i32, y: &'b i32)`; and so on.

The second rule is that if there is exactly one input lifetime parameter, that lifetime is assigned to all output lifetime parameters: `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32) -> &'a i32`.

The third rule is that if there are multiple input lifetime parameters, but one of them is `&self` or `&mut self` because this is a method, the lifetime of `self` is assigned to all output lifetime parameters. This third rule makes methods much nicer to read and write because fewer symbols are needed.

Let's pretend we're the compiler. We'll apply these rules to figure out the lifetimes of the references in the signature of `first_word`. The signature starts without any lifetimes associated with the references:
```rs
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str {
```
The first rule is applied, so each parameter gets its own lifetime. We'll call it `'a` as usual so now the signature is:
```rs
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &str {
```
The second rule applies because there is exactly one input lifetime. The lifetime of the input parameter is assigned to the output lifetime:
```rs
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```
Now all the references in this function have lifetimes, and the compiler can continue without the programmer needing to annotate the lifetimes.

Another example is `longest`:
```rs
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
```
The first rule is applied, and since we have two parameters, they each get their own lifetime:
```rs
fn longest<'a, 'b>(x: &'a str, y: &'b str) -> &str {
```
The second rule doesn't apply, because there is more than one input lifetime. The third rule also doesn't apply because `longest` is a function rather than a method, so none of the parameters are `self`. After working through all three rules, we haven't determined the return lifetime, so this would throw an error.

Because the third rule really only applies in method signatures, we'll look at lifetimes in that context next.

## In Method Definitions
When we implement methods on a struct with lifetimes, we can use the same syntax of generic type parameters. Where we declare these parameters depends on whether they're related to the struct fields or the method parameters and return values.

Lifetime names for struct fields always need to be declared after the `impl` keyword and then used after the struct's name because those lifetimes are part of the struct's type.

In method signatures inside the `impl` block, references might be tied to the lifetime of references in the struct's fields, or they might be independent. Additionally, the lifetime elision rules often make it so that annotations aren't necessary in method signatures. Let's look at some examples using `ImportantExcerpt` shown previously.

First, we'll use a method named `level` whose only parameter is a reference to `self` and whose return value is an `i32`, which is not a reference:
```rs
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn level(&self) -> i32 {
        3
    }
}
```
The lifetime parameter declaration after `impl` and its use after the type name are required, but because of the first rule, we're not required to annotate the lifetime of the reference to `self`.

Here's an example where the third lifetime elision rule applies:
```rs
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn announce_and_return_part(&self, announcement: &str) -> &str {
        println!("Attention please: {announcement}");
        self.part
    }
}
```
There are two input lifetimes, so Rust applies the first rule and gives both `&self` and `announcement` their own lifetimes. Then, because `&self` is a parameter, the return type gets the lifetime of `&self`.

## The Static Lifetime
One special lifetime is `'static`, which denotes that the affected reference *can* live for the entire duration of the program. All string literals have the `'static` lifetime, which we can annotate as follows:
```rs
let s: &'static str = "I have a static lifetime.";
```
The text of this string is stored directly in the binary, which is always available. Therefore, the lifetime of all string literals is `'static`.

You may see suggestions to use the `'static` lifetime. Before specifying `'static` however, think about whether the reference you have actually lives the entire lifetime of the program, and if you want it to. Most the time, errors suggesting this result from attempting to create a dangling reference or a mismatch of available lifetimes.

# Generic Type Parameters, Trait Bounds, and Lifetimes
Let's briefly look at the syntax of specifying generic type parameters, trait bounds, and lifetimes:
```rs
use std::fmt::Display;

fn longest_with_an_announcement<'a, T>(
    x: &'a str,
    y: &'a str,
    ann: T,
) -> &'a str
where
    T: Display,
{
    println!("Announcement! {ann}");
    if x.len() > y.len() { x } else { y }
}
```
This is the `longest` function from before that returns the longer of two string slices. But now there's an extra parameter `ann` of the generic type `T`, which can be filled by any type that implement `Display` as specified by `where`. The extra parameter will be printed using `{}`, which is why the `Display` trait bound is required. Because lifetimes are a type of generic, the declarations of the lifetime parameter `'a` and the generic type parameter `T` go in the same list inside the angle brackets.

# Summary
We covered a lot! Now that you know about generic type parameters, traits and trait bounds, and generic lifetime parameters, you're ready to write code without repetition that works in many situations. Generic type parameters let you apply the code to different types. Traits and trait bounds ensure that even though the types are generic, they’ll have the behavior the code needs. You learned how to use lifetime annotations to ensure that this flexible code won’t have any dangling references. And all of this analysis happens at compile time, which doesn’t affect runtime performance!
