# Writing Automated tests
In his 1972 essay “The Humble Programmer,” Edsger W. Dijkstra said that “program testing can be a very effective way to show the presence of bugs, but it is hopelessly inadequate for showing their absence.” That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try to test as much as we can!

Correctness in our programs is the extent to which our code does what we intend for it to do. Rust is designed with a high degree of concern about the correctness of programs, but correctness is complex and not easy to prove. Rust's type system shoulders a large part of this burden, but it cannot catch everything. As such, Rust includes support for writing automated software tests.

Lets say we write a function `add_two` that adds 2 to whatever number is passed to it. This function's signature accepts and integer as a parameter and returns an integer as a result. When we implement and compile the function, Rust does all the type and borrow checking to ensure that, for instance, we aren't passing a `String` value or an invalid reference to this function. But Rust can't check that this function will do precisely what we intend, which is return the parameter plus 2 rather than, say, the parameter plus 10 or minus 50! This is where tests come in.

We can write tests that assert, for example, that when we pass `3` to the `add_two` function, the returned value is `5`. We can run these tests whenever we make changes to our code to ensure any existing correct behavior has not changed.

Testing is complex: We can't cover every detail about how to write good tests, we will discuss the mechanics of Rust's testing facilities. We'll talk about the annotations and macros available to you when writing your tests, default behavior and options provided for running tests, and how to organize tests into unit tests and integration tests.
