# How to Write Tests
*Tests* are rust functions that verify that the non-test code is functioning in the expected manner. The bodies of test functions typically perform these three actions:

- Set up any needed data or state.
- Run the code you want to test.
- Assert that the results are what you expect.

Let's look at the features Rust provides specifically for writing tests that take these actions, which include the `test` attribute, a few macros, and the `should_panic` attribute.

## Structuring Test Functions
At its simplest, a test in Rust is a function that's annotated with the `test` attribute. Attributes are metadata about pieces of Rust code; one example is the `derive` attribute. To change a  function into a test function, add `#[test]` on the line before `fn`. When you run your tests with the `cargo test` command, Rust builds a test runner binary that runs the annotated functions and reports on whether each test function passes or fails.

Whenever we make a new library project with Cargo, a test module with a test function in it is automatically generated for us. This module gives you a template for writing your tests so that you don't have to look up the exact structure and syntax every time you start a new project. You can add as many additional test functions and as many test modules as you want!

We'll explore some aspects of how test work by experimenting with the template test, before testing any code. Then, we'll write some real world tests that call code and assert its behavior is correct.

Let's create a new library project called `adder` that will add two numbers:
```rs
$ cargo new adder --lib
     Created library `adder` project
$ cd adder
```
The contents of *src/lib.rs* in `adder` should look like the following:
```rs
pub fn add(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
    left + right
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = add(2, 2);
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```
The file starts with an example `add` function so there is something to test.

For now, let's focus on the `it_works` function. Note the `#[test]` annotation: This attribute indicates this is a test function, so the test runner knows to treat the function as a test. There can also be non-test functions in the `tests` module to help setup common scenarios or perform common operations, so we must always indicate which functions are tests.

The example function body uses the `assert_eq!` macro to assert that `result`, which contains the result of calling `add` with 2 and 2, equals 4. This assertion serves as an example of the format for a typical test. Lets run the test.

The `cargo test` command runs all tests in our project, as shown:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.57s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-01ad14159ff659ab)

running 1 test
test tests::it_works ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests adder

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
Cargo compiled and ran the test. We see the line `running 1 test`. The next line shows the name of the generated test function, `tests::it_works`, and the result `ok`. The overall summary `test result: ok.` means that all tests passed, and the following section `1 passed; 0 failed` totals the number of tests that passed or failed.

It's possible to marka test as ignored, which will be covered later. Since that was not done here, it shows `0 ignored`. We can also pass an argument to `cargo test` to only run tests whose name matches a string; this is called filtering, and will be covered later. Here, we haven't filtered the tests being run, so the end summary shows `0 filtered out`.

The `0 measured` statistic is for benchmark test that measure performance. (currently only available in nightly Rust).

The next part of the output starting at `Doc-tests adder` is for the result of any documentation tests. We don't have any documentation tests yet, but Rust can compile any code examples that appear in our API documentation. This feature helps keep your docs and code in sync! This will be covered later, for now we'll ignore the `Doc-tests` output.

Let's start to customize the test to our own needs. First, change the name of `it_works` to a difference name, such as `exploration`:
```rs
pub fn add(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
    left + right
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn exploration() {
        let result = add(2, 2);
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```
Then, run `cargo test` again. The output now shows `exploration` instead of `it_works`:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.59s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-92948b65e88960b4)

running 1 test
test tests::exploration ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests adder

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
Now, we'll add another test, but this time we'll make the test fail! Tests fail when something in the test function panics. Each test is run in a new thread, when the main thread sees a test thread die, the test is marked as failed. Enter the new test as a function named `another`:
```rs
pub fn add(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
    left + right
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn exploration() {
        let result = add(2, 2);
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }

    #[test]
    fn another() {
        panic!("Make this test fail");
    }
}
```
Run the tests again using `cargo test`. The output should look as follows, which shows that `exploration` passed and `another` failed:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.72s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-92948b65e88960b4)

running 2 tests
test tests::another ... FAILED
test tests::exploration ... ok

failures:

---- tests::another stdout ----

thread 'tests::another' panicked at src/lib.rs:17:9:
Make this test fail
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace


failures:
    tests::another

test result: FAILED. 1 passed; 1 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

error: test failed, to rerun pass `--lib`
```
Instead of `ok`, the line `test tests::another` shows `FAILED`. Two new sections appear between the individual results and the summary: The first displays the detailed reason for each test failure. In this case, we get the details that `tests::another` failed because it panicked with the message `Make this test fail` on line 17. The next section lists the names of all the failing tests.

The summary line displays at the end: Overall, our test result is `FAILED`. We had one pass and one fail.

Now that you've seen what the test results look like in different scenarios, let's look at some macros other than `panic!` that are useful in tests.

## Checking Results with `assert!`
The `assert!` macro, provided by stdlib, is useful when you want to ensure that some condition in a test evaluates to `true`. We give the `assert!` macro an argument that evaluates to a Boolean. If the value is `true`, nothing happens and the test passes. If the value is `false`, the `assert!` macro calls `panic!` and the test fails. Using `assert!` helps us check that our code is functioning the way we intend.

Previously in chapter 5, we used a `Rectangle` struct and a `can_hold` method, repeated here. Lets use this code and write some tests for it using `assert!`:
```rs
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
}

impl Rectangle {
    fn can_hold(&self, other: &Rectangle) -> bool {
        self.width > other.width && self.height > other.height
    }
}
```
The `can_hold` method returns a Boolean, which means it's a perfect use case for the `assert!` macro. In the following code, we write a test that exercises the `can_hold` method by creating a `Rectangle` instance that has a width of 8 and a height of 7 and asserting that it can hold another `Rectangle` instance that has a width of 5 and a height of 1:
```rs
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn larger_can_hold_smaller() {
        let larger = Rectangle {
            width: 8,
            height: 7,
        };
        let smaller = Rectangle {
            width: 5,
            height: 1,
        };

        assert!(larger.can_hold(&smaller));
    }
}
```
Note the `use super::*;` line inside the `tests` module. The `tests` module is a regular module that follows the usual visibility rules covered in chapter 7. Because `tests` is an inner module, we need to bring the code under test in the outer module into the scope of the inner module. We use a glob so anything we define in the outer module is available to the `tests` module.

We've named our test `larger_can_hold_smaller` and we've created the two `Rectangle` instances that we need. Then, we called the `assert!` macro and passed the result of calling `larger.can_hold(&smaller)`. This expression is supposed to return `true`, so our test should pass. Let's find out:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling rectangle v0.1.0 (file:///projects/rectangle)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.66s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/rectangle-6584c4561e48942e)

running 1 test
test tests::larger_can_hold_smaller ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests rectangle

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
It does pass! Let's add another test, this time asserting that a smaller rectangle cannot hold a larger rectangle:
```rs
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn larger_can_hold_smaller() {
        // --snip--
    }

    #[test]
    fn smaller_cannot_hold_larger() {
        let larger = Rectangle {
            width: 8,
            height: 7,
        };
        let smaller = Rectangle {
            width: 5,
            height: 1,
        };

        assert!(!smaller.can_hold(&larger));
    }
}
```
Because the correct result of the `can_hold` function in this case is `false`, we need to negate the result (`!`) before we pass it to the `assert!` macro. As a result, our test will pass if `can_hold` returns `false`:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling rectangle v0.1.0 (file:///projects/rectangle)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.66s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/rectangle-6584c4561e48942e)

running 2 tests
test tests::larger_can_hold_smaller ... ok
test tests::smaller_cannot_hold_larger ... ok

test result: ok. 2 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests rectangle

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
Both tests pass! Now let's see what happens when we introduce a bug in our code. We'll change the implementation of the `can_hold` method by replacing the greater-than sign (`>`) with a less than sign (`<`), when comparing the widths:
```rs
// --snip--
impl Rectangle {
    fn can_hold(&self, other: &Rectangle) -> bool {
        self.width < other.width && self.height > other.height
    }
}
```
Running the tests now produces the following:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling rectangle v0.1.0 (file:///projects/rectangle)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.66s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/rectangle-6584c4561e48942e)

running 2 tests
test tests::larger_can_hold_smaller ... FAILED
test tests::smaller_cannot_hold_larger ... ok

failures:

---- tests::larger_can_hold_smaller stdout ----

thread 'tests::larger_can_hold_smaller' panicked at src/lib.rs:28:9:
assertion failed: larger.can_hold(&smaller)
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace


failures:
    tests::larger_can_hold_smaller

test result: FAILED. 1 passed; 1 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

error: test failed, to rerun pass `--lib`
```
Our tests caught the bug! Because `larger.width` is `8` and `smaller.width` is `5`, the comparison of the widths in `can_hold` now returns `false`: 8 is not less than 5.

## Testing Equality with `assert_eq!` and `assert_ne!`

## Adding Custom Failure Messages

## Checking for Panics with `should_panic`

## Using `Result<T, E>` in Tests
