# Test Organization
As mentioned at the start of this chapter, testing is a complex discipline, and different people use different terminology and organization. The Rust community thinks about tests in terms of two main categories: unit test and integration tests. Unit tests are small, focused tests that test one module in isolation at a time, and can test private interfaces. Integration tests are entirely external to your library and use your code in the same way any other external code would, using only the public interface and potentially exercising multiple modules per test.

Writing both kinds of tests is important to ensure that the pieces of your library are doing what you expect them to, separately and together.

## Unit Tests
The purpose of unit tests is to test each unit of code in isolation from the rest of the code to quickly pinpoint where code is and isn't working as expected. You'll put unit tests in the src directory in each file with the code that they're testing. The convention is to create a module named `tests` in each file to contain the test functions and to annotate the module with `cfg(test)`

### The `tests` Module and `#[cfg(test)]`
The `#[cfg(test)]` annotation on the `tests` module tells Rust to compile and run the test code only when you run `cargo test`, not when you run `cargo build`. This saves compile time when you only want to build the library, and also saves space in the compiled artifact, as the tests are not included. You'll see that because integration tests go in a different directory, they don't need the `#[cfg(test)]` annotation. However, because unit tests go in the same files as the code, you'll use `#[cfg(test)]` to specify that they shouldn't be included in the compiled result.

Recall that when we generated the new `adder` project earlier this chapter, Cargo generated this code for us:
```rs
pub fn add(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
    left + right
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = add(2, 2);
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```
On the automatically generated `tests` module, the attribute `cfg` stands for  configuration and tells Rust that the following item should only be included given a certain configuration option. In this case, the configuration option is `test`, which is provided by Rust for compiling and running tests. By using the `cfg` attribute, Cargo compiles our test code only if we actively run the tests with `cargo test`. This includes any helper functions that might be within this module, in addition to the functions annotated with `#[test]`.

### Private Function Tests
There's debate within the testing community about whether or not private functions should be tested directly, and other languages make it difficult/impossible to test private functions. Regardless of what ideology you adhere to, Rust's privacy rules do allow you to test private functions. Consider the example below with the function `internal_adder`:
```rs
pub fn add_two(a: u64) -> u64 {
    internal_adder(a, 2)
}

fn internal_adder(left: u64, right: u64) -> u64 {
    left + right
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn internal() {
        let result = internal_adder(2, 2);
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```
Note that the `internal_adder` function is not marked as `pub`. Since tests are just Rust code, and `tests` is another module, we can bring the parent module into scope with `use super::*`, and then the test can call `internal_adder`. If you don't think private functions should be tested, there's nothing that will force you to do so.

## Integration Tests
In Rust, integration tests are external to your library. They use your library in the same way any other code would, which means they can only call functions part of your library's public API. Their purpose is to test whether many parts of your library work together correctly. Units that work together alone could have problems when integrated, so test coverage of the integrated code is important as well. To create integration tests, you first need a tests directory.

### The `tests` Directory
We create a tests directory at the top level of our project directory, next to *src*. Cargo knows to look for integration test files in this directory. We can then take as many test files as we want, and Cargo will compile each of the files as an individual crate.

Let's create an integration test. We will use the following code listing:
```
adder
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── src
│   └── lib.rs
└── tests
    └── integration_test.rs
```
And add the following code to the *tests/integration_test.rs* file:
```rs
use adder::add_two;

#[test]
fn it_adds_two() {
    let result = add_two(2);
    assert_eq!(result, 4);
}
```
Each file in the *tests* directory is a separate crate, so we need to bring our library into each test crate's scope. We add `use adder::add_two;` at the top of the code, which we didn't need for unit tests.

We don't need to annotate any code in *tests/integration_test.rs* with `#[cfg(test)]`. Cargo treats the *tests* directory specially and compiles files in this directory only when we run `cargo test`.
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 1.31s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-1082c4b063a8fbe6)

running 1 test
test tests::internal ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

     Running tests/integration_test.rs (target/debug/deps/integration_test-1082c4b063a8fbe6)

running 1 test
test it_adds_two ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests adder

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
The three sections of output include unit tests, the integration test, and doc tests. Note that if any test in a section fails, the following sections will not be run. For example, if a unit test fails, there won't be any output for integration and doc tests, because they are only run if all unit tests pass.

The first section of the unit tests is the same as we've been seeing: one line for each unit test (in this case, one named `internal`) and a summary line for the unit tests.

The integration tests section starts with the line `Running tests/integration_test.rs`. Next, there is a line for each test function in that integration test and a summary line for the results of the integration test just before the `Doc-tests adder` section.

Each integration test file has its own section, so if we add more files in *tests*, there will be more integration test sections.

We can still run a particular integration test function by specifying the test function's name as an argument to `cargo test`. To run all the tests in a particular integration test file, use `--test` followed by the name of the file, as shown:
```
$ cargo test --test integration_test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.64s
     Running tests/integration_test.rs (target/debug/deps/integration_test-82e7799c1bc62298)

running 1 test
test it_adds_two ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
This command runs only the tests in the *tests/integration_test.rs* file.

### Submodules in Integration Tests
As you add more integration tests, you might want to make more files in the *tests* directory to help organize them. For example, you can group the test functions by the functionality they're testing. As mentioned earlier, each file in the *tests* directory is compiled as its own separate crate, which is useful for creating separate scopes to more closely imitate the way end users will be using your crate. However, this means files in *tests* doesn't share the same behavior as files in *src*.

The different behavior of *tests* directory files is most noticeable when you have a set of helper functions to use in multiple integration test files, and try to extract them into a common module. For example, if we create *tests/common.rs* and place a function named `setup` in it, we can add some code to `setup` that we want to call from multiple test functions in multiple test files:
```rs
pub fn setup() {
    // setup code specific to your library's tests would go here
}
```
When we run the tests again, we'll see a new section in the test output for *common.rs*, even though this file doesn't contain any test functions, nor is it called anywhere:
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling adder v0.1.0 (file:///projects/adder)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.89s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/adder-92948b65e88960b4)

running 1 test
test tests::internal ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

     Running tests/common.rs (target/debug/deps/common-92948b65e88960b4)

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

     Running tests/integration_test.rs (target/debug/deps/integration_test-92948b65e88960b4)

running 1 test
test it_adds_two ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

   Doc-tests adder

running 0 tests

test result: ok. 0 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s
```
Having `common` appear in the test results with `running 0 tests` displayed for it is not what we wanted. We just wanted to share some code with the other integration test files. To avoid having `common` appear in the test output, instead of creating *tests/common.rs*, we’ll create *tests/common/mod.rs*. The project directory now looks like this:
```
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── src
│   └── lib.rs
└── tests
    ├── common
    │   └── mod.rs
    └── integration_test.rs
```
This is the older naming convention that rust also understands. Naming the file this way tells Rust not to treat the `common` module as an integration test file. When we move `setup` code into *tests/common/mod.rs* and delete *tests/common.rs* the section of test output will no longer appear. Files in subdirectories of the *tests* directory don't get compiled as separate crates or have sections in test output.

After we've created *tests/common/mod.rs*, we can use it from any of the integration test files as a module. Here's an example of calling the `setup` function from the `it_adds_two` test in *tests/integration_test.rs*
```rs
use adder::add_two;

mod common;

#[test]
fn it_adds_two() {
    common::setup();

    let result = add_two(2);
    assert_eq!(result, 4);
}
```
Note that the `mod common;` declaration is the same as the module declaration we demonstrated previously. Then in the test function, we call `common::setup()`.

### Integration Tests for Binary Crates
If our project is a binary crate that only contains *src/main.rs* and doesn't have a *src/lib.rs*, we can't create integration tests in the *tests* directory and bring functions defined in  *src/main.rs* into scope with `use`. Only library crates expose functions that other crates can use; binary crates are meant to be run on their own.

This is one of the reasons Rust projects that provide a binary have a straightforward *src/main.rs* that calls logic that lives in *src/lib.rs*. Using this structure, integration tests can test the library crate with `use`, to make important functionality available. If the important functionality works, the small amount of code in *src/main.rs* will work as well, and that small amount doesn't need to be tested.

# Summary
Rust's testing features provide a way to specify how code should function to ensure that it continues to work as you expect, even as you make changes. Unit tests exercise different parts of a library separately, and can test private implementation details. Integration tests check that many parts of the library work together correctly, and use the library's public API to test the code in the same way external code would. Even though Rust's type system and ownership helps prevent some kinds of bugs, tests are still important to reduce logic bugs having to do with how your code is expected to behave.

Now, let's combine this knowledge and knowledge from previous chapters to work on a project!
